In this lecture, you'll learn about the general I.T. security threat landscape and the difference between
script kiddies and targeted attacks.
We'll start off with some terminology.
First up, a threat, a threat has the potential to cause harm to an I.T. asset.
So if you're under attack by a hacker and they're using a particular tool to attack you, then that
would be a threat.
A vulnerability is a weakness if it compromises with security or functionality of a system.
So if you're running and if the version of Windows, for example, which doesn't have up to the security
patches, then that would be a vulnerable system and exploit users a weakness to compromise with security
or functionality of a system.
So using the old version of Windows, again as the example, it's got a vulnerability because the software
is out of date.
It's the exploit which the attacker can use which exploits that particular vulnerability.
A risk is the likelihood of a successful attack.
So how likely is it that an attack is going to happen?
You also want to factor in what would be the impact if you became a victim of an attack as well.
And finally, mitigation is techniques to eliminate or reduce the potential of unseriousness of an attack
to.
So with the general security threat landscape, it's a constant battle between you and the hacker.
The hacker is always going to be developing new tools, looking for new vulnerabilities and exploits.
And it's up to you to ensure that your mitigation techniques and solutions are up to date to protect
against those vulnerabilities and exploit.
Next thing is malware and malware is any malicious software.
This includes viruses.
A virus is software which inserts itself into other software and can spread from computer to computer.
Virus requires human action to spread.
So, for example, maybe you download a software program from the Internet from somewhere where you
shouldn't do and it's got a virus on there.
Well, you've now infected your PC.
If you then copy the executable program onto a USB stick and share it with somebody else and then they
run it, then they are now infected to to a virus.
It spreads from computer to computer, but it requires human interaction to do that.
For example, emailing it to somebody else or sharing it on a USB stick.
Worms are self-propagating viruses that can replicate by themselves so they don't require human action
to spread.
For example, maybe you are running a database on one of your species and when it gets infected, it's
able to connect.
I look for other systems that are running the database and infect them as well.
So once you're infected in the first place, if you're infected with a worm, if you've got other software,
the susceptible worm, it can spread itself out because of our systems as long as it's called network
connectivity to do so.
Next up is a Trojan horse, and this is named after the old story of the horse of Troy, which you probably
know about where the city of Troy was under siege, but the attackers weren't able to get in.
So what they did was they built a big wooden horse and then they hid some soldiers in there and they
left the outside as an offering.
And then the people inside the city pulled into wooden horse.
And then that night, soldiers all jumped out and the city became overrun.
So a Trojan horse is something that looks nice on the outside, but it's actually got a nasty surprise
on the inside.
And when we're talking about Trojan horses with malware, this is malicious software which looks legitimate
to trick humans into triggering it.
And this often installs back doors.
So what can happen with a Trojan horse is maybe you're a gamer and you're browsing around on the Internet
and you land on a page which tells you click here and you will get free passwords to get into all the
best games.
So it looks nice on the outside.
You then double click or not, maybe it does have passwords there, or maybe it just gives you an error
message.
But because you've double clicked on, not executable file, unbeknown to you, the Trojan horse has
delivered its payload.
What about payload will often be is installing backdoor software on your PC, which allows the attacker
to take control of it or to see information on it later on.
Finally on here, the last type of malware I want to cover is ransomware, ransomware.
Encrypt your data with the attackers key and ask you, the victim, to pay a ransom to obtain the key
to what happens as a gang.
You are going to figure this ransomware on your PC as soon as you do that, encrypt all of the data
on your PC.
And what the attacker can do is later on walk you out from having access to your own data.
The only way that you can get access back into that is by paying them a ransom, at which time they
will give you the key.
So you can get into that data.
Really a way that you can guard against ransomware is by making sure that you have got backups of your
PC.
And then if you do fall victim to this, you can just roll back to the last good backup.
Obviously, it's best not to be a victim of ransomware in the first place.
And I'll talk about the mitigation techniques against malware and everything else that I'm going to
cover and Mwencha intellectual later on in the section.
Hacking tools, many hacking tools that are available for the hacker they can use to attack your systems,
penetration testers who are the good guys use the same tools as hackers to test for vulnerabilities.
So the way that you can guard against cash if you've got vulnerabilities and see what the impact is,
is you have to do exactly the same thing as the hackers would do.
So you're going to be using the same tools.
Penetration Tester is actually our job tools.
If you're a penetration tester, it's your job to try to hack into companies.
And if you find a way to do so, you let the company know about that so they can then go and protect
against that vulnerability.
Hacking tools typically run on Linux, with Carly Lennix being a preferred flavor for doing this.
Tools include password cracking tools with a password cracking tool.
If the attacker is able to see a login page, you can use the tool to try to automate the gashing of
passwords.
Other tools include sniffers.
So if the attacker is able to see your data going across the network, they can use a sniffer to see
the contents of that data so they can see the information that is in there.
A ping sweeper is used for doing reconnaissance against a target.
What a ping sweeper does is it pings a range of IP addresses to see if there is a response.
At first, a response or not means that there's a system there and the attacker can then dig deeper
to see if that system has any vulnerabilities.
A tool that they can use to discover vulnerabilities is part and vulnerability scanners.
So typically the attacker will do a ping sweep first, find out what systems are alive, and will then
dig deeper by using part and vulnerability scanners to see what parts are open on those systems.
And also if there's any known vulnerabilities, for example, if the systems have of the software.
But leads me on to Kiddie's after talking about the hacking tools to script kiddies is well-known and
derogatory term for low skilled attackers who download and use off the shelf hocking software to launch
exploits to.
These are general hobbyists.
And they've just done some playing around on the Internet with we've found some hacking sites there,
which has got software that they can download.
Often this hacking software requires very little skill use.
The attacker can just point to a particular range of public IP addresses and see if you're able to do
any damage.
Script kiddie somebody that uses just off the shelf hacking software doesn't really have very high level
skills themselves that result these people out there, they will typically attempt to exploit any vulnerable
host that they can connect to.
So they're not generally doing targeted attacks against a particular organization.
Often they're just trying to attack anybody out there who's vulnerable to the particular attack.
More skilled attackers will also look for random victims as well.
So in order to meet their goals, such as installing ransomware or a botnet.
I'll talk about what a botnet is later in this lecture.
And organizations are constantly under these types of attacks.
So what this means is if you are working for an organization and your organization is connected to the
Internet, for sure, you are constantly being bombarded by attacks unremembered.
Years and years ago, the first time I broke it in my first I.T. job and one of my rules there was looking
after the companies firewall because basically I was I.T. guy looking after everything.
And the first time I looked in the logs in the firewall, I was thinking, wow, panicking, we're under
attack.
And I quickly found out that that is just the normal state of affairs.
That was just a small company that I was working for.
They're highly unlikely that anybody would target them for a particular attack.
But first of these, just general random attacks happening against everybody all the time.
So because of this, even if you think that you're not going to be the victim of a targeted attack,
you still need to make sure that you are protected against attacks because we're going to happen against
you anyway.
So with these targeted attacks, this is where it is directed against a particular individual or organization,
and this type of attack is rare, skilled attackers who are doing a targeted attack will typically start
off with very stealthy and low impact reconnaissance, which is very hard to detect by you.
And then they will systematically escalate the attack from there.
So they start off by being very unobtrusive, very stealthy, and they will go through steps with a
system that they have.
Each one is intended to get more access to your systems, which allows them to have more damage.
And it's going to be more and more obtrusive as we go through that system.
So this is the evolution of a targeted attack, the attacker will typically start off by doing external
reconnaissance, Google searches and things like that, and then they will be becoming more obtrusive
as they go along, trying to get further and further in your systems until they make an initial compromise
so they get access to one of your systems.
At this point, they will then escalate their privileges.
So usually the attacker will start off by going for the low hanging fruit if they can see any system
that they can access easily, even if it's got very little access to the other corporate systems behind
there, then they will compromise that system first.
They will then try to get higher level privileges on that system, which will for them, hopefully allow
them to get access to Furber systems from there to external reconnaissance first, then the initial
compromise, then escalation of privileges or not just them.
And then from that system, they can then do internal reconnaissance because they're already inside
organization that will then do further compromise and further escalation of their privileges until they
reach their end goal.
OK, so that was an overview of the security threat landscape with the terminology and the difference
between script kiddies and a targeted attack in the next lecture will get into the detail of the different
type of attacks that hackers will launch against you starting off with reconnaissance.